###### Columna O

How the JS engine processes our program before it runs.

JS is typically classified as an interpreted scripting language, single, top-down pass. JS is in fact
parsed/compiled in a separate phase before execution begins.

Functions hold and access variables, they maintain their original scope no matter where in the program the functions are eventually executed. This is called closure.

# Compiled vs. Interpreted
Code compilation is a set of steps that process the text of your code and turn it into a list of instructions the computer can understand.

Interpretation the source code is transformed line by line; each line or statement is executed before immediately proceeding to processing the next line.

Modern JS engines actually employ numerous variations of both compilation and interpretation in the handling of JS programs.

# Compiling Code
Program is processed by a compiler in three basic stages:
1. **Tokenizing/Lexing**: breaking up a string of characters into meaningful (to the
language) chunks, called tokens.  `var a = 2;` becomes `var`, `a`, `=`, `2` and `;`. Tokenizer were to invoke stateful parsing rules. Lexing.
2. **Parsing**: tokens and turning it into a tree of nested elements, grammatical structure of the program. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).
> For example, the tree for var a = 2; might start with a top-level **node called
VariableDeclaration** , with a child node called **Identifier** (whose value is a ),
and another child called **AssignmentExpression** which itself has a child called
**NumericLiteral** (whose value is 2 ).
3. Code Generation:

The JS engine is vastly more complex than just these three stages.

JS engines don't have the luxury of an abundance of time to perform their work and optimizations, JS engines use all kinds of tricks (like JITs, which lazy compile and even hot re-compile).

# Required: Two Phases
Parsing/compilation first, then execution.
Three program characteristics: syntax errors, early errors, and hoisting.
## Syntax Errors from the Start
```js
var greeting = "Hello";
console.log(greeting); greeting = ."Hi";
// SyntaxError: unexpected token .
```
If JS was executing top-down line by line, one would expect the "Hello" message being printed before the syntax error being thrown. That doesn't happen.
## Early Errors
```js
console.log("Howdy");
saySomething("Hello","Hi");
// Uncaught SyntaxError: Duplicate parameter name not
// allowed in this context
function saySomething(greeting, greeting) {
	"use strict";
	console.log(greeting);
}
```
The SyntaxError here is thrown before the program is executed.
> It's because strict-mode.

## Hoisting
```js
function saySomething() {
	var greeting = "Hello";
	{
		greeting = "Howdy"; // error comes from here
		let greeting = "Hi";
		console.log(greeting);
	}
}
saySomething();
// ReferenceError: Cannot access 'greeting' before
// initialization
```
The next statement would declare a block-scoped variable of the same name `greeting` is if the JS engine had already processed this code in an earlier pass, and already set up all the scopes and their variable associations.
The `ReferenceError` here technically comes from `greeting = "Howdy"` accessing the greeting variable too early, a conflict referred to as the **Temporal Dead Zone (TDZ)**.

# Compiler Speak
```js
var students = [
	{ id: 14, name: "Kyle" },
	{ id: 73, name: "Suzy" },
	{ id: 112, name: "Frank" },
	{ id: 6, name: "Sarah" }
];
function getStudentName(studentID) {
	for (let student of students) {
		if (student.id == studentID) {
			return student.name;
		}
	}
}
var nextStudent = getStudentName(73);
console.log(nextStudent);
// Suzy
```
All occurrences of variables/identifiers serve two "roles": **target** or **assignment** or **source of a value**.
"LHS" (aka, target) and "RHS" (aka, source) → "Left-Hand Side" and "Right-Hand Side".
## Targets
What makes a variable a target? Consider:
```js
students = [ // ..
```
There are three other target assignment operations
```js
for (let student of students) { // ..
```
Another one:
```js
getStudentName(73)
```
`73` is assigned to the parameter `studentID`.

A function declaration is a special case of a target reference. `var getStudentName = function(studentID)`, not exactly accurate.

>Function and variable is referred to as "function hoisting",

## Sources
In `for (let student of students)`, students is a source reference
In `if (student.id == studentID)`, both are.
`student` is also a source reference in `return student.name`.

# Lexical Scope
"lexical scope": scope is determined at compile time. "Lexical" is associated with the "lexing" stage of compilation.

Controlled entirely by the placement of functions, blocks, and variable declarations, in relation to one another.

A reference (target or source role) for a variable must be resolved as coming from one of the scopes that are lexically available to it; if not, it's "undeclared".

Compilation doesn't actually do anything in terms of reserving memory for scopes and variables. None of the program has been executed yet.

Compilation creates a map of all the lexical scopes that lays out.

Scopes are identified during compilation, they're not actually created until runtime, each time a scope needs to run.